Improve migration guide (#490)
cylc/cylc-doc: src/7-to-8/major-changes/compatibility-mode.rst

.. admonition:: Does This Change Affect Me?
   :class: tip

   This will affect you if you want to run Cylc 7 (``suite.rc``) workflows

>    using Cylc 8.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   using Cylc 8
```
(Avoid having to update at 8.1)

compatibility mode.

First, run ``cylc validate`` **with Cylc 7** on your ``suite.rc`` workflow
to check for deprecation warnings and fix those before validating with Cylc 8.
See :ref:`below <compat.eg.c7val>` for an example.

.. warning::

   ``cylc validate`` operates on the processed ``suite.rc``, which
   means it will not detect any deprecated syntax that is inside a
   currently-unused Jinja2/EmPy ``if...else`` branch.

Some workflows may require modifications to either upgrade to Cylc 8 or make
interoperable with Cylc 8 backward compatibility mode. Read on for more details.

Cylc commands in task scripts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Check for any use of Cylc commands in task scripting. Some Cylc 7 commands
have been removed and some others now behave differently.
However, ``cylc message`` and ``cylc broadcast`` have *not* changed.
See the :ref:`full list of command line interface changes<MajorChangesCLI>`
and see :ref:`below <compat.eg.cylc-commands>` for an example.

Python 2 to 3
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Whereas Cylc 7 runs using Python 2, Cylc 8 runs using Python 3. This affects:
- modules imported in Jinja2
- Jinja2 filters, tests and globals
- custom xtrigger functions

> Note that task scripts are not affected - they can run using an independent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that task scripts are not affected - they run in an independent
```
(Not necessarily 100% true for local background jobs, but users should think of it like this anyway).

environment.

> See :ref:`py23` for more information and examples of how to implement
> interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See :ref:`py23` for more information and examples of how to implement
interoperability if your workflows extend Cylc or Jinja2 with custom Python scripts.
```
(Should make it clear that most users do not need to worry about this).

Restarting a Cylc 7 workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cylc 8 cannot *restart* a Cylc 7 workflow mid-run. Instead, :ref:`install
<Installing-workflows>` the workflow to a new run directory and start it
from scratch at the right cycle point or task(s):

- ``cylc play --start-cycle-point=<cycle>`` (c.f. Cylc 7 *warm start*), or
- ``cylc play --start-task=<cycle/task>``   (Cylc 8 can start anywhere in the graph)

.. note::

   Any previous-cycle workflow data needed by the new run will need to be
   manually copied over from the original run directory.

> 

Reviewer: It will be a very common requirement though. Should we not provide advice on how to do it? 

Maybe don't call it "restarting", to avoid confusion.  Perhaps something like **How to start your migrated workflow from where Cylc 7 left it**. And give general advice and caveats.

> 

Author: Or `"Restarting" a Cylc 7 workflow`?

> 

Reviewer 2: > It will be a very common requirement though.

I'm not aware of any requirement or desire at our end. I think the only use case would be really, really, long-running workflows, I'm not aware that we have any examples of this. If they exist I would advise finishing the workflow run with Cylc 7 rather than to attempting to migrate to Cylc 8 part-way through a run.

Migrating like this is hazardous, e.g. remote installation works differently, data might need to be relocated on multiple filesystems, etc. We discussed this in a meeting at our end?

> 

Author: I've replaced this subsection with a bullet point saying you can't restart, use Cylc 7 to finish a Cylc 7 workflow

> 

Reviewer: > I'm not aware of any requirement or desire at our end. I think the only use case would be really, really, long-running workflows, I'm not aware that we have any examples of this.

Most of our workflows are "really, really, long-running" - i.e. they no final cycle point, or a very distant one. And most are "warm cycling" - i.e there are inter-cycle dependencies, and doing a cold start from scratch is not something you want to do unless you have no choice.

Anyhow, we may have got our wires crossed here. I just meant "advise users how to continue a warm-cycling Cylc 7 workflow with Cylc 8", not a literal in-place restart from the DB. 

Along the lines of:

*Shut down (with Cylc 7) after a particular cycle point, copy any inter-cycle data over to a new Cylc 8 install (taking account of the run-name if appropriate), and cold start that with Cylc 8 at the next cycle point.*

Custom remote installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have used Rose 2019 you may be used to all files and directories inside
your :term:`source directory` being installed on remote install targets.
However, by default, Cylc 8 only installs
:ref:`certain files and directories <RemoteInit>` onto remote install targets.
See :ref:`below <compat.eg.custom_remote_install>` for an example of how to specify

> custom files to be installed.

Reviewer 2: This should go in / be covered by the install section - https://cylc.github.io/cylc-doc/latest/html/7-to-8/major-changes/cylc-install.html#remote-installation

tasks only; use ``cylc pause`` for entire workflows.
(Additionally, ``$CYLC_SUITE_NAME`` is deprecated in favour of
``$CYLC_WORKFLOW_ID``, though still supported.)

In order to make this interoperable, so that you can run it with both Cylc 7
and Cylc 8 backward compatibility mode, you could do something like this
in the bash script:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[foo]]
           script = """
               if [[ "${CYLC_VERSION:0:1}" == 7 ]]; then
                   cylc hold "$CYLC_SUITE_NAME"
               else
                   cylc pause "$CYLC_WORKFLOW_ID"
               fi
           """

Note this logic (and the ``$CYLC_VERSION`` environment variable) is executed
at runtime on the :term:`job host`.

Alternatively, you could use :ref:`Jinja` like so:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[foo]]
           {% if CYLC_VERSION is defined and CYLC_VERSION[0] == '8' %}
               script = cylc pause "$CYLC_WORKFLOW_ID"
           {% else %}
               script = cylc hold "$CYLC_SUITE_NAME"
           {% endif %}

Note this logic (and the ``CYLC_VERSION`` Jinja2 variable) is executed locally

> prior to parsing the workflow configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prior to Cylc parsing the workflow configuration.
```
(since Jinja2 does parse it earlier)

.. _compat.eg.custom_remote_install:

Custom remote installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you want to include certain files and directories in remote installation,
use :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler]install`. To ensure your workflow is still
interoperable with Cylc 7, wrap it in a Jinja2 check like so:

.. code-block:: cylc

   {% if CYLC_VERSION is defined and CYLC_VERSION[0] == '8' %}
   [scheduler]
       install = my-dir/, my-file

>    {% endif %}

Reviewer 2: I get the 7/8 interop angle because of the config changed but I think this would be better off in the installation section for a cleaner separation rather than dipping into install without explaining it fully here, then covering it again there.
